This game is meant to be complex and hard.
Any similarities to another species are purely fortuitous and unintentionnal.
The economy is never stable. Things are always fluctuating, and that's because they are the result of a dynamic simulation where lots of things continuously influence each other. Don't worry if you can't get everything to stay still.
If a porco's income represents 3% of his region's total income, his wealth will be 3% of the region's total wealth.
The income of a social class is shared equitably between all the porcos belonging to that class. The individual income of a porco is therefore an average value based on the total income of his social class.
The value of rare resources will tend to match the wealth of your richest classes, while the value of abundant resources will tend to match the wealth of the commoners.
A porco with a wealth of 2 will be able to fully satisfy his need for any resource which costs 2 coins or fewer.
If a resource costs 4 coins, a porco with a wealth of 1 can only satisfy 25% of his need for that resource.
The wealth of a porco defines his purchasing power, which determines whether he can afford to buy the resources to satisfy his needs.
Wealth is a unit of objective value. It is defined by the time spent by a porco working on anything, regardless of the subjective value (coin prices) his society gives to what he does.
Wealth, as a universal unit of value, is the same across all regions and players.
Each porco spending time working on something produces Wealth proportional to the amount of work done.
A porco working in a building with twice the efficiency of another building will produce twice as much per day, and he will therefore have twice the wealth.
Neither the type nor price of goods has an effect on wealth. Price is relative to each society while wealth is an objective universal unit representing the time spent working on something.
If a porco earns 10 coins out of 1000 (the sum of all his region's incomes), but then things change and there are suddenly 2000 coins, the porco has effectively lost half of his coins' value and half of the regional wealth he used to have out of his 10 coins.
Currencies represent a right to a share of real value, and do not necessarily have value by themselves. In Ymir, that real value is the unit "wealth", which is represented by a currency called "coins". 
If the total region wealth were one pie, each coin would give a porco the right to a slice of it. The size of the slice would depend on how many other coins there are (the sum of all incomes in the region) .
The sum of a region's incomes represents the total amount of coins and therefore the ojective value (wealth) each coin represents.
In Ymir, to make things simpler and avoid the complication of relative currencies, the amount of coins is automatically set as the sum of all incomes. Therefore, the actual value (Wealth) of each coin also fluctuates automatically depending on the sum of all incomes.
You can withdraw resources from a storage building which has no workers, but this building cannot receive any more resources until it has workers again.
Any resource distributed and made available to the population (whether by merchants, producers, or any other method) is permanently lost, regardless of whether it is actually sold.
The price of a resource will always be at least one coin above its production cost to ensure a minimum profit to its producers.
If an industry produces something highly valued, the producers of its required materials will covet that industry's income and increase the prices of their materials.
Each project has an optimal number of researchers. Beyond that, any extra researchers will only add minor contributions to the project.
In a project, each researcher contributes "research points" based on his intelligence.
Be careful: assigning researchers to a project reduces the productivity of all buildings employing the researchers' class.
You cannot directly control what ideas your people will have nor when ideas appear. Each idea has its own hidden conditions.
In the building tab, you can still choose to build the previous (obsolete) version of a building by right-clicking on the building's button.
